---
author: "Chris"
desc: "Julia"
keywords: "Language design, data science"
lang: "en"
stylesheet: "layout"
title: "Julia"
updated: "2021-04-04"
---
Recently, I have been doing some of the work I would normally do in Python in Julia instead. I have been a fairly intensive user of Python for the past three years, and I think that it's a pretty good language, but I feel I am clear-eyed about its limitations. I have complained in the past about its loosey-goosey typing and 90s-era object-orientation in the past. I think it is as good as it could have been, in its chosen space, given what was known about language design at the time; but times have changed. Julia, by contrast, has made many of the same choices as Kotlin, Go or the current generation of languages.

The headline features that Julia appears to offer over Python are:
- a stronger type system
- native vectorization of calculations
- improved speed (it's JIT-compiled, it doesn't have Python's GIL)
- (supposedly, though I've not tried it) reasonable interop with some Python libraries.
Which was enough to get me interested.

It seems to call itself a functional language, but most languages seem to call themselves functional languages these days, and category theory enthusiasts are likely to be disappointed:
- There's no pattern matching
- There's no `x :: xs`-type list deconstruction
- Nary a monad to be found
- Nulls are present, though handled with it the typescript/dart approach of having a `Nothing` type (with a `nothing` instance), plus a `Union` type to indicate that something might be a value, or might be null. So `Union{Float64, Nothing}` is Julia's equivalent of `Option[Double]`
- Functions are encouraged, but not obliged, to be pure; by convention a ! is used to indicate impurity, eg `append!()` to add an element to an array in-place.

It has some other interesting aspects:
- functions are intrinsically polymorphic, so `f(i::Int)` can be defined alongside `f(s::String)`, with no name conflict. This is a straightforward way of providing ad-hoc polymorphism and is like a more general version of Python's magic methods.
- n-dimensional arrays are a native type, and are typed at the depth level - eg a 2-d array of Ints has type `Array{Int, 2}`, where the 2 is the depth. Typing the depth (but not the length of any particular dimension) makes a lot of sense and seems like some kind of local optimum.
- there is a type system that is complex enough for most needs but not as Byzantine as, say, that of Scala.
- arrays are one-indexed, so the first element of an array is `arr[1]`. `arr[0]` is always an error. I assume this was a controversial decision. It works well for maths, where eg the summation symbol (sigma) by convention starts from 1. It is easier to get used to than you might think, and means that eg `arr[length(arr)]` always returns the final value of an array, rather than generating an `IndexError`, as it would in Python.
- The package manager is integrated into the REPL and feels quite slick and modern (sadly, it doesn't play well with NixOS) - for the presumably very few other human beings on the planet having this issue, I am using the workaround described here: https://owenlynch.org/posts/2020-10-23-julia-setup/
- (Maybe saving the best for last) because Julia is natively fast, the source code for third-party libraries is (as far as I have seen) in all cases written in Julia itself. This contrasts very favourably with the *It's a Small World*-style language medley that is numpy.

These choices make the language feel almost childishly simple to use. It pushes the user towards a "bag-of-functions" style of programming - almost all your code is just calling functions on objects. Assuming you're not being forced to crank out boilerplate or repeat yourself, simplicity is, of course, a good thing. Julia feels like a largely ideology-free language that has made pragmatic design decisions, and tried to find a sweet spot between giving the user too much choice, versus too little power. I'm not entirely sure if I like pragmatic, ideology-free-languages - I'm a big fan of Haskell, and coding in Julia is not as euphoric as coding in Scala - but it is certainly admirable how quickly you can get up and running, and I can see myself using it more in future.

