---
author: "Chris"
desc: "Thoughts about MOOCs"
keywords: "mooc, udacity, data"
lang: "en"
stylesheet: "article"
title: "MOOCs"
updated: "2021-02-22T12:00:00Z"
---
Me: "I'm doing a MOOC."
Other: "What's a MOOC?"
-- that's how a lot of my conversations used to start. The answer, of course, is a Massive Open Online Course. I am a believer in ongoing education. Or, since this is such an anaemic statement that nobody would ever disagree with it, I believe that you are failing yourself if you do not commit a meaningful percentage of your (outside of work hours) time and resources to learning new professional skills. If you cannot find anything interesting to learn in your chosen career area, this is probably a sign that you should think about whether this is an area you want to continue to be in.

MOOCs are a good tool here. There are a few well-known MOOC providers - Udacity, Udemy, Coursera, with the first two being so similar in both name and presentation that I had to check that they weren't the same company. There are also a number of more specialized MOOC providers, as well as a few (yet more specialized) single-person enterprises. To the extent that there is any relationship between organization scale and course quality, it seems to be an inverse one - the course quality from the bigger providers can vary quite widely, whereas the one-man shops I have used have been more invested and more diligent about keeping the courses up-to-date.

The courses range in time and intensity, from a few hours to a number of months (these latter ones frequently being known as *nanodegrees*). I've so far done, in chronological order:

- **MIT Fintech Future Commerce Course** - notable for having a high level of group work. Many of the lectures were just platforms for slightly feted entrepreneurs to blow their own trumpets or promote their own products. Overall not terribly useful.
- **Udacity Artificial Intelligence Course** - IIRC this is the course which got the whole MOOC thing started and forms part of Udacity's backstory. This has been my favourite MOOC to date - the instructors were reassuringly geeky (and, within that world, high-profile), and it was a good technical challenge. Towards the end it veered off from theory to practice in an undesirable way (more on that later). I learned tree recursion here, over the course of trying to program a minimax system for chess.
- **Nick Janetakis Dive Into Docker course** - this was a short MOOC, which I think took me a couple of days. As far as I know, Nick is one of the one-man shop type places I mention above. The quality was very high and he seemed committed to keeping it updated.
- **Wes Bos, React for Beginners** - again, since the URL for this was wesbos.com, I think I am fair to assume that Wes is a one-man shop. I didn't finish this one, but this was no fault of Wes, the course seemed very good as far as I got into it.
- **Udacity Data Engineering nanodegree** - I've recently finished this one and am intending to write a separate review as its own post.

As I've said, the quality of the two single-man MOOCs (from Nick Janetakis and Wes Bos) was high. For the bigger providers, it was variable. One criticism I had with all of them is that they are often marketed much more as professional skills development than abstract learning (there's lots of 'supercharge your career'-type rhetoric), and so prefer theory over practice. I don't think that one should view learning as a way to stick an extra 20% on your salary, and taking this approach has a number of pernicious side-effects. 

Of my three nanodegrees, the Udacity AI course suffered from this the least, but at the end, they were having us use pre-constructed vision recognition systems. This was a bit of a joke - I could fiddle with the parameters and inspect the outcome, but I had no real idea what was going on behind the scenes. Presumably Udacity felt unable to end the course without providing something that had some (supposedly) direct application. A few of the people on the course seemed to have no direct interest in AI but thought that it might somehow be useful to whatever they were doing - they introduced themselves with statements like "I'm hoping this can boost my shop's sales". I'm not sure how they envisaged this happening, but with their naive expectations it was hard not to feel a little sorry for these people.

These topics (Data Engineering, Artificial Intelligence) are huge areas, and intelligent people can spend a lifetime mastering just a specific niche of them. It is unrealistic for laypeople to expect to grasp them after five months of part-time coursework. Rather than pretending that we can leapfrog theory and just move straight to practice, these courses should have had more modest ambitions and presented themselves as starter packs for people wanting to move into these fields.

